Fully-discrete spatial eigenanalysis of discontinuous spectral element methods:
insights into well-resolved and under-resolved vortical ﬂows
Niccolò Tonicelloa,∗, Rodrigo C. Mourab, Guido Lodatoa, Gianmarco Mengaldoc
aNormandie Université, INSA et Université de Rouen, St. Etienne du Rouvray (Rouen), France
bInstituto Tecnológico de Aeronáutica, São José dos Campos, Brazil
cNational University of Singapore, Singapore
Abstract
This study presents a comprehensive spatial eigenanalysis of fully-discrete discontinuous spectral element meth-
ods, now generalizing previous spatial eigenanalysis that did not include time integration errors. The inﬂuence
of discrete time integration is discussed in detail for diﬀerent explicit Runge-Kutta (1st to 4th order accurate)
schemes combined with either Discontinuous Galerkin (DG) or Spectral Diﬀerence (SD) methods, both here
recovered from the Flux Reconstruction (FR) scheme. Selected numerical experiments using the improved SD
method by Liang and Jameson [1, 2, 3] are performed to quantify the inﬂuence of time integration errors on
actual simulations. These involve test cases of varied complexity, from one-dimensional linear advection equa-
tion studies to well-resolved and under-resolved inviscid vortical ﬂows. The eﬀect of mesh regularity is also
considered, where time integration errors are found to be, in the case of irregular grids, less pronounced than
those of the spatial discretisation. Still, when simulations are well-resolved, the overall order of accuracy of the
(fully-discrete) method of choice is limited to that of the time integration scheme. Moreover, it is shown that,
while both well-resolved and under-resolved simulations of linear problems correlate well with the eigenanalysis
prediction of time integration errors, the correlation can be much worse for under-resolved nonlinear problems.
In fact, for the under-resolved vortical ﬂows considered, the predominance of spatial errors made it practically
impossible for time integration errors to be distinctly identiﬁed. Nevertheless, for well-resolved nonlinear simu-
lations, the eﬀect of time integration errors could still be recognized. As a result, the eigenanalysis predictions
are expected to hold (even if partially) in direct numerical simulations of turbulence. This highlights that the
interaction between space and time discretisation errors is more complex than otherwise anticipated, contribut-
ing to the current understanding about when eigenanalysis can eﬀectively predict the behavior of numerical
errors in practical under-resolved nonlinear problems, including under-resolved turbulence computations.
Keywords:
High-order methods, spectral element methods, ﬂux reconstruction, discontinuous Galerkin,
spectral diﬀerence, eigenanalysis.
1. Introduction
Along with the increasing computational power experienced in the last few decades, the use of Computational
Fluid Dynamics (CFD) is becoming a more and more common tool in industrial aerodynamic analysis and
design [4]. The expanding capabilities of modern computers have fuelled the development of a large number
∗Corresponding author
Email address: niccolo.tonicello@gmail.com (Niccolò Tonicello)
Preprint submitted to Journal of Computational Physics
November 30, 2021
arXiv:2111.13891v1  [physics.flu-dyn]  27 Nov 2021

of innovative numerical high-order schemes for ﬂuid dynamics, whose accuracy clearly surpasses that of more
popular low order methods. In particular, much interest has been focused on spectral element methods due to
their geometric ﬂexibility and promising computational eﬃciency [5]. These include the Discontinuous Galerkin
(DG) [6, 7, 8], Spectral Diﬀerence (SD) [9, 10, 11] and Flux Reconstruction (FR) [12, 13] schemes. The use of
high-order numerical schemes has shown promising results in the simulation of turbulent ﬂows, in both Direct
Numerical Simulation (DNS) [14, 15, 16, 17] and Large-Eddy Simulations (LES) [18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23]. Due
to the rapidly developing ﬁeld of high-order methods, especially in ﬂuid dynamics, the research community is
constantly looking for more eﬃcient and reliable tools to quantify the peculiar numerical properties of such
schemes. Indeed, for under-resolved simulations (such as LES), the role played by the numerical scheme can be
of fundamental importance. For instance, the same computation, performed with diﬀerent methods, can lead
to dramatically diﬀerent outcomes in realistic ﬂow conﬁgurations [24, 21, 20].
Spectral analyses based on the numerical discretisation of the linear advection equation are a common tool in
the evaluation of the intrinsic numerical properties of high-order methods for advection dominated ﬂows. Such
techniques are particularly simple to implement and computationally inexpensive. However simplistic, they
are capable of providing useful information regarding the scheme, such as numerical dispersion and diﬀusion.
The most widely used spectral analysis technique is commonly referred to as temporal eigenanalysis [25, 26, 27,
28, 29, 30], which quantiﬁes how speciﬁc spatial oscillations will evolve over time under periodic conditions in
space. The complementary analysis technique, called spatial eigenanalysis [31, 32, 33, 34, 35], considers instead
how wave-like solutions of given frequency behave while propagating in space under inﬂow-outﬂow conditions.
Even if similar and intimately connected from a theoretical perspective, these two approaches can provide very
diﬀerent insights on the general behaviour of the numerical scheme. The former is more suitable for temporally
evolving problems, whereas the latter is more appropriate for spatially developing problems.
Although such techniques are able to reveal useful numerical properties, they have been often categorised as
too simplistic. In fact, a direct connection between the numerical discretisation of the linear advection equation
and more complex three-dimensional nonlinear simulations can be everything but trivial.
The high-order
schemes' research community has also produced substantial works on generalised forms of spectral analyses.
This includes analyses of linear advection on multiple dimensions [25, 36, 37], of linear advection problems
with non-constant velocity [38, 39, 35] and even of alternative eigenanalysis techniques, such as non-modal
analysis [40] and combined-mode analysis [41]. Nonetheless, all of these approaches commonly involve a semi-
discrete form of the linear advection equation, where only spatial numerical errors are considered. The main
goal of the present work is focused on a fully-discrete formulation of spatial eigenanalysis where also temporal
errors are taken into account. Despite the fact that some recent work has been presented regarding fully-
discrete temporal eigenanalysis [42, 43, 44], the full generalisation of spatial eigenanalysis including a temporal
discretisation remains, as of yet, unexplored. Even if spatial errors play a critical role in the simulation of
turbulent ﬂows, the interaction with the temporal counterparts is everything but obvious.
The temporal
discretisation can signiﬁcantly aﬀect the spatial errors, leading to much diﬀerent results in terms of accuracy
and stability of the numerical simulation.
The ultimate goal of simpliﬁed spectral analyses is to predict, within a reasonable range, how a certain
scheme, for a given resolution, would behave in practical ﬂow conﬁgurations. For instance, it is possible to
2

estimate which grid resolution allows one to reliably perform Implicit LES (ILES), thereby reducing the com-
putational burden otherwise incurred. In the same way, temporal discretisations would beneﬁt from large time
steps, while introducing negligible numerical errors. In other words, a trade-oﬀbetween accuracy and com-
putational cost needs to be found both spatially and temporally. Finding such delicate balance using fully
three-dimensional simulations can be extremely expensive and even pointless. Ideally, eﬃcient and reliable sim-
pliﬁed spectral analysis techniques aim at providing precisely this kind of information at very low computational
cost.
The paper is organised as follows. In section 2, we introduce the fully-discrete eigenanalysis framework
which serves both temporal and spatial approaches. This framework is applied to the Flux Reconstruction
method, which can recover both the discontinuous Galerkin and Spectral diﬀerence schemes. In section 3, we
present the eigenanalysis results for the fully-discrete spatial approach, where we focus on the interpretation of
the diﬀusion curves and the contributions of the diﬀerent (transmitted/reﬂected) modes. The observations will
be speciﬁcally classiﬁed into well-resolved and under-resolved frequency ranges, providing a direct link with
DNS and LES approaches, respectively. In section 4, we present the numerical experiments conducted to assess
the validity of the eigenanalysis. In particular, ﬁrst a discretisation of the linear advection equation will be
considered, followed by more complex inviscid ﬂows based on the Euler equations. In line with the theoretical
discussion, numerical results will be arranged in well-resolved and under-resolved ﬂows. Finally, in section 5,
we outline the key conclusions of this work.
2. Eigenanalysis framework
In this section, we introduce the fully-discrete eigenanalysis framework, which serves both the temporal
(section 2.1) and the spatial (section 2.2) approaches. The classical fully-discrete temporal eigenanalysis (that
was originally reported by Vermeire and Vincent [43]) is presented ﬁrst, as a way of introducing the key building
blocks for the fully-discrete spatial eigenanalysis.
2.1. Classical fully-discrete temporal eigenanalysis
All the relevant steps of temporal eigenanalysis will be herein introduced using the FR scheme, which is well-
known for its ability to recover diﬀerent methods with a speciﬁc choice of its correction functions [45, 46, 47].
The present study considers two such methods in particular, namely DG and SD. In fact, this strategy allows
one to perform subsequent eigenanalysis studies for any other method that FR is capable of recovering.
In the standard temporal analysis, the linear advection equation is discretised looking for wave-like solutions
in order to study the numerical description of speciﬁc wavenumbers and their evolution over time.
Then,
dispersion and dissipation properties of any scheme follow directly from the corresponding eigensolutions. Let
us now suppose the case of a constant unitary advection velocity:
∂u
∂t + ∂u
∂x = 0.
(1)
This equation admits plane wave solutions of the form
u(x, t) = eι(θx−ωt),
with ι =
√
−1,
(2)
3

provided that the angular frequency ω = ω(θ) is such that
Re(ω) = θ
and
Im(ω) = 0,
(3)
where θ is a real-valued wavenumber chosen at the initial condition (in the case of standard temporal eigen-
analysis). Equation (3) provides what are respectively known as dispersion and diﬀusion relations for the exact
plane wave solution. A numerical discretisation of the linear advection equation is now introduced on a grid
of equally spaced elements of ﬁxed width hn = h = 1. Under such assumptions, a FR spatial discretisation of
equation (1) within the standard element Ωn can be written as
dˆun
dt = −2
N
X
j=0
ˆun
dlj
dˆx (ˆxi) −(2 ˆf I
L −2ˆuL)dgL
dˆx (ˆxi) −(2 ˆf I
R −2ˆuR)dgR
dˆx (ˆxi),
(4)
where N is the order of the solution polynomial, ˆuL = ˆun(−1, t) and ˆuR = ˆun(+1, t).
To examine a suﬃciently general framework, the classical set of numerical ﬂuxes for the linear advection
equation is considered:
ˆf I
L = (1 −α)ˆun−1(+1, t) + αˆun(−1, t)
(5)
and
ˆf I
R = (1 −α)ˆun(+1, t) + αˆun+1(−1, t).
(6)
Note that α = 0 leads to a standard upwind scheme, whereas α = 0.5 leads to a centred scheme. In the following
sections, unless stated otherwise, standard upwind ﬂuxes will be considered. The α parameter can be used to
mimic diﬀerent levels of interface upwinding, which can be directly linked to more complex numerical ﬂuxes for
the Euler or Navier-Stokes equations (via Riemann solvers). Equation (4) can be written in matrix form as:
dˆun
dt = −2Dˆun −(2 ˆf I
L −2lT ˆun)gL −(2 ˆf I
R −2rT ˆun)gR,
(7)
where ˆun
i = ˆu(ˆxi), Dij = dlj
dˆx (ˆxi), gL/R
i
=
dgL/R
dˆx (ˆxi) and ri = li(1), li = li(−1).
In order to reduce the inﬁnite dimensional problem to an element-wise framework, Bloch wave-like type of
solutions are sought, namely:
ˆun = eι(˜θxn/h−˜ωt)ˆv,
(8)
where tilde accent denotes the numerical counterparts of continuum variables and xn indicates the left bound-
ary of the element n in the global reference frame.
Once ˆun is properly deﬁned, due to periodicity, it is
straightforward to obtain a closed form for all the ﬂuxes expressed in equation (4):
ˆf I
L = (1 −α)e−ι˜θ
rT ˆun + αlT
ˆun,
ˆf I
R = (1 −α)
rT ˆun + αlT eι˜θ
ˆun.
(9)
Finally, it can be seen that, due to solution periodicity, the problem has now been reduced to an element-wise
formulation, i.e., the numerical ﬂuxes now depend only on the local solution ˆun. Hence, index n can be dropped
and the ﬁnal discretised equation can be written as
dˆu
dt = −2

Dˆu + ((1 −α)e−ι˜θrT ˆu + αlT ˆu −lT ˆu)gL + ((1 −α)rT ˆu + αlT eι˜θˆu −rT ˆu)gR

,
4

or, in a more compact way:
dˆu
dt = −2(C−e−ι˜θ + C0 + C+eι˜θ)ˆu,
(10)
where C0 = D −(α −1)gLlT −αgRrT , C−= (1 −α)gLrT and C+ = αgRlT . When FR is made to recover
speciﬁc methods (such as DG or SD), matrices C above are what will diﬀerentiate them, but the structure
of the problem does not change. In either case, the discretised system is now reduced to the following linear
dynamical system:
dˆu
dt = H(˜θ)ˆu.
(11)
The approach herein outlined represents a classical tool in numerical analysis, particularly used for the
theoretical study of novel high-order schemes. Notice that the present analysis is often called semi-discrete
temporal eigenanalysis due to the absence of time discretisation. Indeed, taking advantage of the analytical
form of wave-like solutions, the dynamical system deﬁned by equation (11) can be reduced to the following
eigenvalue problem:
−ι˜ωˆu = H(˜θ)ˆu.
(12)
Alternatively, instead of considering the analytical form of the wave-like solution, a numerical time integration
scheme can be introduced to advance in time. The numerical solution at the time step t + 1 can be generally
approximated by the M-stage explicit Runge-Kutta schemes as
ˆut+1 ≈
M
X
m=0
βm
(H(˜θ)∆t)m
m!
ˆut = T(˜θ, ∆t)ˆut,
(13)
where ∆t is the time step and β contains the coeﬃcients of the speciﬁc Runge-Kutta scheme.
This formulation is denoted as fully-discrete since both spatial and temporal discretisations are simulta-
neously involved. Considering the present generalised formulation, two main closely linked analyses can be
performed. The ﬁrst is relatively popular and originates from the classical stability analysis of numerical dis-
cretisation of partial diﬀerential equations. In particular, it is well-known that in equation (13), the combined
space-time discretisation is denoted as stable if the spectral radius of the iteration matrix T is strictly smaller
than unity. Namely, for the speciﬁc case of Von Neumann analysis, the full discretisation is considered linearly
stable if, for a given time step ∆t,
∀˜θ ∈

−π(N + 1)/h;
π(N + 1)/h

:
λ(T(˜θ, ∆t)) < 1,
(14)
where λ(T) denotes the spectral radius of the matrix T.
A complementary analysis, instead, takes into account the Bloch wave-like form of the numerical solution
and generalises the concept of dispersion/diﬀusion curves in the fully-discrete analyses. In fact, exploiting the
Bloch-like form of the approximate solution, it can be shown (see [48, 43]) that
ˆut+1 = e−ι˜ω∆tˆut.
(15)
Consequently, the fully-discrete version of the dispersion/diﬀusion eigenanalysis can be written as:
e−ι˜ω∆tˆut = T(˜θ, ∆t)ˆut.
(16)
5

Notice, in fact, that for ∆t →0 we have
T →
I + H∆t + O(∆t2),
e−ι˜ω∆t →
1 −ιω∆t + O(∆t2)
and the problem reduces to
(1 −ι˜ω∆t + O(∆t2))ˆut = (I + H∆t + O(∆t2))ˆut
−ι˜ω∆tˆut = H∆tˆut + O(∆t2)
−ι˜ωˆut = Hˆut
which coincides with classical semi-discrete eigenvalue problem.
In a similar way with respect to the classical analysis, considering (16), it is possible to compute the
frequencies ˜ω for any given value of ˜θ and ∆t.
Therefore, the choice of the time integration scheme and,
in particular, of a stable time step ∆t, will aﬀect the dispersion and diﬀusion curves. Such curves can be
interpreted in the same manner as in the semi-discrete analysis and signiﬁcant deviations from the semi-discrete
dispersion/diﬀusion curves can crucially aﬀect the numerical properties of the spatial discretisation.
We ﬁnally note that, had we chosen to work in the equations above with unspeciﬁed values of the advection
velocity a and the mesh spacing h, the relevant time-step factor appearing in equation (13) would have been
∆t = a∆t/h—namely, the Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy (CFL) number—instead of simply ∆t. Hence, we remark
that, although we chose to work with ∆t for the sake of simplicity, one can actually have in mind the CFL
number whenever ∆t values are mentioned in the remainder of the paper.
2.2. Fully-discrete spatial eigenanalysis
In the classical temporal eigenanalysis, for any real-valued wavenumber ˜θ, the numerical angular frequency
˜ω can be obtained through the eigenvalue problem in equation (16). The frequency ˜ω will describe the numerical
evolution of the speciﬁed wavenumber ˜θ over time. It is however possible to invert the problem by imposing
a time frequency ˜ω and subsequently seek for wavenumbers ˜θ that solve the inverted problem. Such approach
is commonly referred to as spatial eigenanalysis and it represents a very useful tool for non-periodic problems
since it aims at studying the dynamics of prescribed time frequencies over space.
Within the framework of semi-discrete eigenanalysis, the equation deﬁning the relationship between ˜θ and
˜ω is the same, namely equation (12), and can be written in an alternative form as
det(H(˜θ) + ι˜ωI) = 0.
(17)
In this case, ˜ω is a real-valued prescribed scalar and the nonlinear equation (17) is solved in the unknown ˜θ.
This nonlinear equation can be particularly complex to solve and, except for some very particular cases, cannot
be analytically inverted. Considering the fully-discrete space-time discretisation, an equivalent equation which
deﬁnes the relation between ˜ω and ˜θ can be derived from equation (16), namely
det(T(˜θ, ∆t) −e−ι˜ω∆tI) = 0.
(18)
Note of course that, in the temporal eigenanalysis, the addition of a temporal discretisation does not
signiﬁcantly complicate the overall problem. In fact, the matrix T can be easily computed once ˜θ and ∆t are
6

prescribed. Subsequently, the eigenvalue problem can be solved in e−ι˜ω∆t, which can be ﬁnally inverted to
obtain the exact value of ˜ω. However, in the spatial eigenanalysis, the speciﬁc matrix T inﬂuences the general
structure of the nonlinear equation to be solved in ˜θ. In particular, if the simple explicit Euler integration
scheme is considered, then equation (18) becomes:
det(I + ∆tH(˜θ, ∆t) −e−ι˜ω∆tI) = 0.
(19)
If z is deﬁned as z = eι˜θ, the ﬁnal nonlinear equation in z can be written as
det((1 −e−ι˜ω∆t)I −2∆t(C−z−1 + C0 + C+z)) = 0.
(20)
Again, notice that for ∆t →0, the diagonal term 1−e−ι˜ω∆t tends to ι˜ω∆t and the fully-discrete formulation
goes back to the classical semi-discrete form:
det(ι˜ωI −2(C−z−1 + C0 + C+z)) = 0,
(21)
which is exactly equation (17). On the other hand, for a RK22 scheme, the formulation becomes much more
complex as higher powers of z appear in the ﬁnal equation:
det

(1 −e−ι˜ω∆t)I+
+ ∆t2 C−C−
z−2+
+
 ∆t2(C−C0 + C0C−) −2∆tC−
z−1+
+
 ∆t2(C−C0 + C0C0 + C+C−) −2∆tC0
+
 ∆t2(C+C0 + C0C+) −2∆tC+
z+
+ ∆t2 C+C+
z2

= 0.
(22)
This way, the order of the nonlinear equation increases signiﬁcantly and additional roots for z are expected
to be found (especially for time discretisation schemes of higher order). The role of multiple wave modes in
spatial eigenanalysis has been discussed in more detail in [34]. As properly explained in the next section, only
one solution will be denoted as the physical one, whereas the others are considered spurious.
3. Theoretical Results
In this section, we show the results associated with the fully-discrete spatial eigenanalysis just introduced.
The theoretical ﬁndings of the fully-discrete temporal eigenanalysis previously reported by Vermeire and Vin-
cent [43] were correctly reproduced within the present implementation too. These have been used for validation
purposes only and, for the sake of brevity, are not shown here.
It is important to highlight that, from equation (2), the numerical wave-like solutions depend on the nu-
merical equivalent of θ, i.e. ˜θ (whose imaginary part makes the diﬀusion curve plots below) according to
u ∝exp[−Im(˜θ)x] exp[ιRe(˜θ)x −ωt] ,
(23)
where reﬂected waves should be considered with ∆x < 0, thus being stable for Im(˜θ) < 0.
7

Figure 1: Dissipation curve for the 5th-order FR-SD standard upwind scheme coupled with RK11 (explicit Euler) denoting a single
transmitted physical mode, shown for ∆t = 0.01, 0.02, . . . , 0.1 (with dissipation values becoming more negative as ∆t increases).
The plot on the right shows a closer look near the origin. These re-aﬃrm that RK11 is convectively unstable for pure advection.
In the following, we consider high-order FR-based DG/SD methods in space, coupled with explicit Runge-
Kutta schemes of increasing order of accuracy (and increasing number of stages): RK11, RK22, RK33 and
RK45. Hence, we start with the 1st-order accurate, one-stage Runge-Kutta scheme (more commonly known as
the Explicit Euler method) until ﬁnally addressing the well-known 4th-order accurate, ﬁve-stages Runge-Kutta
scheme by Carpenter and Kennedy [49]. This allows for a detailed exposition of the fully-discrete eigenanalysis
results, whose complexity grows with the number of stages of the temporal scheme, as shown below.
In ﬁg. 1, we show the dissipation curve for the 5th-order FR-SD standard upwind method when coupled with
RK11. This curve is shown for increasing values of the time step ∆t, namely ∆t = 0.01, 0.02, . . . , 0.1, with dissi-
pation values becoming more negative as ∆t increases. Note that, given a ∆t value, only one eigenmode/curve
exists in this case, corresponding to a single transmitted physical wave. This is because, from eq. 20, the char-
acteristic polynomial in the unknown z has the same order of the semi-discrete analysis (compare with eq. 21).
We recall that, in the semi-discrete analysis [32], only the physical transmitted mode exists in case of standard
upwinding (α = 0 in eq. 10), whereas one reﬂected spurious wave exists in addition if α ̸= 0. As for the curves
in ﬁg. 1, negative dissipation values indicate in fact anti-dissipative behaviour (convective instability), since we
are dealing with a physical transmitted wave, cf. eq. 23. Hence, ﬁg. 1 essentially re-aﬃrms that RK11 (explicit
Euler) is only marginally stable for pure advection [50]. Interestingly, for moderately large ∆t, waves regain
stability beyond a certain frequency ω, probably due to increased dissipation from the spatial discretisation
at large frequencies. These features will be tested in the next section, as they highlight how the fully-discrete
eigenanalysis is useful in revealing non-intuitive characteristics stemming from the coupling between spatial
and temporal discretisations.
Now we consider the classical 2nd-order explicit Runge-Kutta (RK22) scheme, this time coupled for simplicity
with the 2nd-order FR-SD standard upwind method. The resulting discretisation is stable for ∆t < ∆tmax,
where ∆tmax is the critical time-step size at which instabilities ﬁrst appear. In ﬁg. 2, we show the corresponding
dissipation curves for increasing values of τ = ∆t/∆tmax. When τ = 0, the results match those of the semi-
discrete analysis, where only the transmitted physical mode exists in case of standard upwinding. For τ > 0,
8

Figure 2: Dissipation curves for the 2nd-order FR-SD standard upwind scheme coupled with RK22 for increasing values of τ =
∆t/∆tmax. The plots on the right show the same left curves, but for a larger frequency range. The semi-discrete (τ = 0) result also
appears when τ > 0 for reference as a thin continuous curve. The physical mode is shown in red, whereas the spurious transmitted
mode is shown as a thick black curve. A vertical dashed line indicates the cut-oﬀfrequency ωc = π/∆t.
9

a spurious transmitted mode appears in addition to the transmitted physical one, not to be confused with the
thin continuous curve which simply shows the semi-discrete (τ = 0) physical curve as reference (note that the
physical curve is shown in red, whereas the spurious one is shown as a thick black curve). The existence of
exactly two modes is guaranteed by the characteristic polynomial in eq. 22 being only quadratic in z, since matrix
C+ becomes zero in case of standard upwinding (α = 0 in eq. 10). This feature can be traced algebraically to
the number of stages of the time discretisation adopted. In general, the number of modes (in case of standard
upwinding) matches the number of stages of the chosen explicit Runge-Kutta scheme. The physical mode can
be identiﬁed as the one anchored to the origin of the dissipation plots, thus featuring vanishing dissipation
levels for well-resolved waves (as expected in simulations of pure advection).
Returning to ﬁg. 2, we note that, as τ increases, the physical mode becomes less dissipative overall (at
least for ωh(N + 1)−1 > 0.5, say) until ﬁnally touching the horizontal axis, whose crossing (for τ > 1) means
anti-dissipation (convective instability). The spurious mode, despite being inﬁnitely dissipated for τ →0, also
has its dissipation reduced as τ increases; in fact, for moderately large τ, its dissipation levels are comparable to
those of the physical mode. Small dissipation is typically undesirable for spurious modes, since it allows them
to survive longer as artiﬁcial oscillations in a simulation, potentially aﬀecting not only solution quality, but also
numerical stability [33]. Curiously, as τ →1, the spurious mode's dissipation gradually approaches that of the
physical mode, almost matching it at τ = 1. This behaviour closely resembles that of reﬂected spurious modes
which exist for either very low or very high upwinding levels (i.e. either centred ﬂuxes or hyper-upwinding),
cf. [32], except that reﬂected modes have dissipation values of opposite sign when compared to those of their
corresponding physical modes. In any case, for the present scheme, both physical and spurious modes touch
the horizontal axis of zero dissipation when τ = 1, becoming therefore unstable for ∆t > ∆tmax.
Still in ﬁg. 2, note that the spurious mode's dissipation curve (e.g. when considered until ωc = π/∆t, such
that ωch(N + 1)−1 is marked as a vertical dashed line) resembles a mirror image of the physical mode's curve.
What is more generally true, though, is that the spurious curve is simply a shifted replication of the physical
curve, while both are periodic functions of period 2ωc. Interestingly, the periodicity of eigencurves in spatial
analysis has not been noted in the literature so far. This is because ωc →∞when τ →0, cf. ﬁg. 2, consistent
with the fact that the spurious mode becomes inﬁnitely dissipated for τ →0, as already mentioned. Therefore,
periodicity is only visible in fully-discrete spatial analysis. This is in contrast with temporal analysis, where one
sees periodicity already in the semi-discrete case, as well as the shifted replication property amongst multiple
eigencurves [29, 51].
Although the cut-oﬀvalue ωc = π/∆t can be rightfully recognized as the Nyquist frequency imposed by the
discrete time-stepping even outside of the fully-discrete spatial framework [43], it is only in the fully-discrete
spatial analysis that ωc exhibits visual correlation with the periodicity of the eigencurves, as already noticed in
ﬁg. 2. In fact, the normalized version of ωc, namely ωch(N + 1)−1, is the counterpart of the wavenumber limit
θh(N +1)−1 = π typically used in temporal analysis. Hence, it seems appropriate to plot spatial analysis curves
only until ωc. Nevertheless, as it will become clear in subsequent plots, it so happens that the actual limit
observed for explicit Runge-Kutta schemes of R stages is R ωc/2. Interestingly, the conclusion is that multiple
stages seem to aﬀect the temporal resolution as if multiple single-stage time steps of size δt = 2∆t/R had
been employed instead. This seems akin to how multiple element-wise polynomial modes increase the spatial
10

Figure 3: Dissipation curves of the physical transmitted mode at increasing values of τ (from τ = 0 in black until τ = 1 in yellow).
Results obtained for the 2nd-order FR-SD standard upwind discretisation coupled with RK22.
resolution of a single element, as if it had sub-elements.
A ﬁrst obvious consequence of adopting R ωc/2 as the right-most value of ω when plotting eigencurves is
that this bound tends to inﬁnity for τ →0. Indeed, in the semi-discrete spatial analysis, every value of ω is
allowed, in principle. Secondly, such bound gets closer and closer to zero for larger time steps, as only lower
and lower frequencies can be solved by the temporal discretisation when the time step increases. These eﬀects
are highlighted in ﬁg. 3, where only the physical mode is represented for diﬀerent values of τ.
We now consider the 5th-order FR-SD standard upwind scheme coupled with either RK33 (ﬁg. 4) or RK45
(ﬁg. 5). Dissipation curves for τ = 0.5 and τ = 1 are respectively shown on the left and right plots within these
ﬁgures. As previously mentioned, the number of roots in the respective characteristic polynomials matches
the number of stages in the adopted time scheme. This is why RK33 (ﬁg. 4) yields three transmitted modes,
whereas RK45 (ﬁg. 5) yields ﬁve. The correspondence between the number of eigenmodes and stages in spatial
analysis resembles that between eigenmodes and element-wise polynomial modes in temporal analysis (in line
with the previous comment regarding the interpretation of stages as sub-divisions of the actual time step ∆t).
In ﬁgs. 4 and 5, the black and red vertical dashed lines indicate, respectively, ωc and R ωc/2, the latter matching
half the period of the physical mode, as expected. Note that the physical mode is found to be symmetric with
respect to the red dashed line (actual Nyquist frequency). Moreover, all eigenmodes are observed to be shifted
replications of the physical mode, similar to temporal analysis. This is sometimes useful for the identiﬁcation
of the physical mode.
The physical curves of ﬁgs. 4 and 5 have been isolated and are shown in ﬁg. 6 for diﬀerent values of τ. For
comparison, the equivalent plots for FR-DG are given in ﬁg. 7. As one can see, the general trends observed
for FR-SD are also seen for FR-DG. Some diﬀerences, however, can be discerned. For example, since the CFL
limit is more restrictive for FR-DG than for FR-SD (both under standard upwinding), the dissipative curves
of FR-DG extend to higher frequencies (recall that ωc = π/∆t). Moreover, as already pointed out in previous
works [31, 32, 33, 35], FR-DG is spatially less dissipative than FR-SD, overall. A more complete comparison
11

Figure 4: Dissipation curves for the 5th-order standard upwind FR-SD coupled with RK33 at τ = 0.5 (left) and τ = 1 (right). The
physical mode is shown as a continuous red curve. The vertical black dashed line marks ωc, whereas the vertical red dashed line
marks R ωc/2 (indicating half a period).
Figure 5: Dissipation curves for the 5th-order standard upwind FR-SD coupled with RK45 at τ = 0.5 (left) and τ = 1 (right). The
physical mode is shown as a continuous red curve. The vertical black dashed line marks ωc, whereas the vertical red dashed line
marks R ωc/2 (indicating half a period).
between FR-SD and FR-DG is shown in the Appendix (cf. ﬁgs. 28 and 29).
To quantify the mutual inﬂuence between time and spatial discretisations, the approximation error can be
evaluated separately for both temporal and spatial approaches, since the exact solution is known. In particular,
for the temporal approach, the error ET will read
ET = |˜ω(θ) −ω(θ)|,
(24)
whereas, in the spatial analysis the error ES can be evaluated as
ES = |˜θ(ω) −θ(ω)|.
(25)
Notice, of course, that the estimates above take into account both dispersive and diﬀusive errors. Both errors
have been evaluated for the 5th-order standard upwind FR-SD method coupled with the RK33 scheme. Results
are shown in ﬁg. 8. Similar to what has been found in [43], for small values of θ, the accuracy of the scheme is
12

Figure 6: Dissipation curves of the physical transmitted mode at increasing values of τ (from τ = 0 in black until τ = 1 in yellow).
Results obtained for the 5th-order FR-SD standard upwind discretisation coupled with either RK33 (left) or RK45 (right).
Figure 7: Dissipation curves of the physical transmitted mode at increasing values of τ (from τ = 0 in black until τ = 1 in yellow).
Results obtained for the 5th-order FR-DG standard upwind discretisation coupled with either RK33 (left) or RK45 (right).
reduced by the time integration method. In particular, the expected super-convergence of the FR-SD scheme
(of order 2N + 1 = 9) reduces to a 4th-order convergence. For a certain intermediate range of wavenumbers,
instead, the theoretical accuracy of the scheme is preserved. The smaller the prescribed time step, the longer
such range will penetrate into the small wavenumbers region. The same applies in the spatial analysis: for small
frequencies, the scheme converges with order 4 and for intermediate frequencies with order 9. The diﬀerences
between the two plots are restricted to the high frequencies/wavenumbers region. In fact, since the imaginary
parts of both ˜ω and ˜θ are negligible for small frequencies/wavenumbers, the temporal and spatial approaches
are equivalent, whereby ˜ω and ˜θ simply switch axes.
As already discussed in previous works on spatial eigenanalysis [31, 32], whenever the numerical interface
ﬂux departs from the standard upwind condition, twice as many roots will exist in the relevant characteristic
polynomial. The new roots are typically found to represent wave-like modes that propagate in the opposite
direction (reﬂected modes) and are consequently considered spurious. As already shown for upwind ﬂuxes, for
any given value of ω, the number of roots depends on the number of stages of the time integration scheme. In
13

Figure 8: Approximation errors ET and ES obtained, respectively, from the temporal (left) and spatial (right) frameworks for a
5th-order FR-SD method coupled with the RK33 scheme.
Figure 9: Dissipation curves of the physical transmitted mode at increasing values of τ (from τ = 0 in black until τ = 1 in yellow).
Results obtained for the 5th-order FR-SD with nearly centered ﬂux (α = 0.49) coupled with either RK33 (left) or RK45 (right).
the same way, for non-upwind schemes, the total number of roots is expected to be twice the number of stages.
In the Appendix (cf. ﬁgs. 30 and 31), plots showing all such eigencurves are given. Here, to avoid unnecessary
confusion, only the physical modes are shown. The case considered is that of nearly centered ﬂux (α = 0.49),
whose dissipation curves are shown in ﬁg. 9, again for the 5th-order FR-SD method coupled with either RK33
or RK45, as previously shown for the standard upwind case in ﬁg. 6.
Similarly to the standard upwind case, for increasing values of τ, numerical dissipation decreases in the
high frequency region. For suﬃciently high values of τ, the curve for Im(˜θ) is expected to touch the horizontal
axis with the potential consequent onset of anti-dissipative behaviours, leading to convective instability. This is
clearly visible in ﬁg. 9 for the RK33 scheme (left). Less so for the RK45 scheme, for which a similar behaviour is
expected for high frequencies which are well beyond the plotted range. For almost centered ﬂuxes, in the spatial
analysis framework, the presence of dissipative bubbles has been already observed in previous works [32, 35]. In
other words, signiﬁcant dissipation appears concentrated in certain frequency ranges, whereas other ranges can
be almost completely unaﬀected. In ﬁg. 9, it can be noticed that, for increasing values of τ, the separation of
14

scales is less strong and the dissipative curves are characterised by a more monotonic behaviour. Non-monotonic
dissipation proﬁles in frequency space might potentially lead to undesirable non-smooth features in simulations
with broadband energy content. It is expected that having neighbouring frequencies so diﬀerently aﬀected can
deteriorate the distribution of dissipation among scales and impact accuracy and stability of the numerical
simulation.
Consequently, only well-resolved wavenumbers/frequencies behave quite similarly in temporal/spatial ap-
proaches, whereas large diﬀerences are observed in the high wavenumbers/frequencies region. For practical
turbulent simulations using high-order discontinuous spectral element methods, depending on the local level of
resolution, diﬀerent ranges of scales and frequencies are of particular interest. For highly resolved ﬂows, such as
in DNS, the correlation with spectral analysis will be mainly restricted to the well-resolved regions (i.e. small
wavenumbers/frequencies). Instead, reducing the resolution of the scheme and passing from DNS to LES of
turbulent ﬂows, higher wavenumber and frequency regions in the plots will provide more useful information.
4. Numerical experiments
In order to validate the theoretical framework introduced in previous sections, a series of numerical experi-
ments is presented to quantify the interplay between temporal and spatial errors for practical ﬂows. First, we
consider the discretisation of the one-dimensional linear advection using the SD scheme. We then take into
account more complex numerical simulations of the Euler equations in order to evaluate the inﬂuence of the
time step on both well-resolved and under-resolved ﬂows. In all the Euler computations presented herein, if
not stated diﬀerently, the original Roe ﬂux has been employed as a representative of the standard upwind ﬂux.
All the simulations presented in the following subsections have been performed using the improved SD method
by Liang and Jameson [1, 2, 3].
4.1. One-dimensional linear advection equation
The ﬁrst numerical test consists in the discretisation of the one-dimensional linear advection equation with
an oscillating inlet boundary condition. This simulation allows to monitor the general behaviour of dissipative
bubbles when the prescribed time step approaches the CFL limit. Tests are conducted using almost centered
numerical ﬂuxes and RK33 or RK45 time integration schemes for diﬀerent injected frequencies. Accordingly,
ﬁg. 10 shows the same curves presented in ﬁg. 9 in which the tested frequencies are indicated in order to
appreciate the expected level of dissipation of each test.
The relevant equivalent frequencies are ω1 = 1,
ω2 = 2.75 and ω3 = 3.5 (only for the RK33 test), which are highlighted in ﬁg. 10 using dashed vertical lines.
Close to ω2 and ω3, the expected levels of numerical dissipation are highlighted using blue dots.
The domain Ω= [0, 1] is split into 100 equally spaced elements (h = 0.01). The frequency of the inlet signal
can then be directly linked to the equivalent frequency ωh/(N + 1). The simulation matches the theoretical
analysis: a 5th order SD discretisation, coupled with a RK33/RK45 time integration schemes has been employed.
To see the inﬂuence of the temporal errors, increasing values of τ have been considered. First, in ﬁg. 11, the
velocity signal u(x) is plotted along the x direction for ω = ω1 and for diﬀerent values of τ using a RK33 time
marching scheme. According to the theoretical analysis presented in the ﬁrst part of the paper, for increasing
values of τ, larger values of dissipation are expected (see ﬁg. 10). Such conclusion is conﬁrmed by the numerical
15

(a) RK33
(b) RK45
Figure 10: Physical dissipative curves varying τ (FR-SD) using almost centered numerical ﬂuxes. Dashed, vertical lines denote
the frequencies ω1, ω2 and ω3 (only for RK33). For ω2 and ω3 the dots indicate the levels of dissipation expected for the speciﬁc
values of τ used in the simulations.
(a) τ = 0.1
(b) τ = 0.5
(c) τ = 0.9
Figure 11: Solution signal u(x) at prescribed frequency ω1 for diﬀerent values of τ (RK33).
simulations shown in ﬁg. 11. The amplitude of the signal u(x) tends, in fact, to decrease for larger time steps.
The same experiment has been repeated using a RK45 scheme and the results are shown in ﬁg. 12. The same
conclusions apply: increasing the time step magnitude leads to an increase of numerical dissipation. Notice,
furthermore, that for τ = 0.9 the signal is more dissipated using the RK33 scheme rather than the RK45 one.
In fact, from ﬁg. 10, it can be noticed that the dissipative curves, in proximity of ω1, tend to increase a bit more
using the RK33 scheme rather than the RK45 one. The same comparison has been performed for the frequency
ω2, which is located in between dissipative bubbles. More or less the same behaviour is expected, where larger
values of τ lead to stronger numerical dissipation. The solution u(x) is shown for the RK33 scheme in ﬁg. 13
and for the RK45 scheme in ﬁg. 14. The only interesting diﬀerence is that, in agreement with the theoretical
analysis, for τ = 0.9 the RK33 scheme is less dissipative than the RK45. For τ ≈0 and τ = 0.5, instead, the
levels of numerical dissipation are quite similar.
In the RK33 case, the additional frequency ω3 has been considered. At this frequency, in fact, a diﬀerent
behaviour with respect to the low frequencies is expected: for increasing values of τ, numerical dissipation
is expected to decrease instead of increase like for all the other frequencies. Such behaviour is conﬁrmed in
16

(a) τ = 0.1
(b) τ = 0.5
(c) τ = 0.9
Figure 12: Solution signal u(x) at prescribed frequency ω1 for diﬀerent values of τ (RK45).
(a) τ = 0.1
(b) τ = 0.5
(c) τ = 0.9
Figure 13: Solution signal u(x) at prescribed frequency ω2 for diﬀerent values of τ (RK33).
ﬁg. 15 where for τ very close to the CFL limit the numerical dissipation is signiﬁcantly lower. In similarity with
fully-discrete temporal eigenanalysis, the highest frequencies are the ﬁrst to experience instability. Then, in a
general sense, the present test case suggests that for a reasonably large, low frequency region, the inﬂuence of
the time integration scheme is essentially dissipative and larger time steps cause stronger dissipation. In the
high-frequency region, instead, the behaviour is the opposite: in the semi-discrete analysis such frequencies are
usually dumped very fast, whereas, approaching the CFL limit, numerical dissipation decrease signiﬁcantly,
until, eventually, it changes sign leading the simulation to be unstable. Consequently, in similarity with respect
the fully-discrete temporal eigenanalysis, the largest frequencies are responsible for the CFL instability.
Finally it is interesting to study the behaviour of a scheme that, according to the fully-discrete spatial eige-
nanalysis herein presented, is expected to be unstable for any choice of time-step. The same computational grid
and order of approximation have been chosen. In similarity with previous tests, a series of frequencies have been
simulated. In ﬁg. 16 the dissipative curves for a 5th order FR-SD discretisation coupled with an explicit Euler
time-integration is shown. In particular, in order to quantify the instability of such space/time discretisation,
the following equivalent frequencies have been considered: ω0 = 0.1 and ω1 = 1.3. The low frequency test is
meant to investigate the instability of the prescribed discretisation for any choice of computational time step.
We expect that for any choice of time-step the prescribed sinusoidal signal will grow while propagating in the
domain. For very low frequencies the increase will likely be very small, but nonetheless still present.
For the second frequency, instead, a diﬀerent behaviour is expected to take place: for suﬃciently small
time steps the numerical scheme should dissipate the inlet oscillations, but, for increasing time steps, numerical
17

(a) τ = 0.1
(b) τ = 0.5
(c) τ = 0.9
Figure 14: Solution signal u(x) at prescribed frequency ω2 for diﬀerent values of τ (RK45).
(a) τ = 0.1
(b) τ = 0.5
(c) τ = 0.9
Figure 15: Solution signal u(x) at prescribed frequency ω3 for diﬀerent values of τ (RK33).
dissipation should decrease, until it becomes anti-dissipation, leading the numerical solution to grow while
propagating in the domain. The sudden change of behaviour, from dissipative to anti-dissipative is predicted
to take place at ∆t ≈0.01 from the theoretical analysis. The intersection between the dissipative curve for
∆t ≈0.01 and the x-axis is highlighted in ﬁg. 16. Consequently, after proper rescaling by the grid size of the
present simulation (h = 0.01), we expect to observe such change of trend for time steps around ∆t = 1.0×10−4.
Three time-step values are therefore tested near ∆t = 1.0 × 10−4, as shown in ﬁg. 17.
The numerical solution behaves as expected, where a sudden change from dissipative to anti-dissipative
character is observed for increasing time steps.
For ∆t = 9.925 × 10−5, the prescribed signal at the inlet
is barely aﬀected by numerical dissipation. For smaller time steps, numerical dissipation increases and the
sinusoidal signal is expected to decrease in amplitude as numerically conﬁrmed in the top plot of ﬁg. 17.
Finally, for time steps slightly larger, instead, negative values of the imaginary part of ˜θ arise and the solution
is expected to grow over space, as conﬁrmed in the bottom plot of ﬁg. 17. Numerical results are then in very
good agreement with the theoretical analysis herein presented which is able to properly predict the eﬀect of
numerical dissipation in a fully-discrete framework where both spatial and temporal errors contribute on the
overall accuracy and regularity of the numerical solution.
Regarding the simulation of the lowest frequency, in order to allow a suﬃcient large number of periods
within the unitary domain, the number of elements has been increased to 1000. In ﬁg. 18 the results of the
simple advection of the sinusoidal signal with lowest frequency is shown for the explicit Euler scheme with
a considerably smaller time step, namely ∆t = 1.0 × 10−6 = 5 × 10−3h/(N + 1). On the top, the solution
18

Figure 16: Physical dissipative curves varying τ (FR-SD) using Euler time-integration. On the left, a closer look near the origin.
Vertical lines indicate the frequencies that have been numerically simulated.
is probed at x = 0.5, on the bottom, instead, the numerical solution at the end of the simulation is shown.
As predicted by the theoretical analysis, the solution tends to grow over space. Such behaviour is even more
evident in ﬁg. 19, where the solution is zoomed close to the line u = 1.
The same simulation has been performed using an even smaller time step ∆t = 1.0×10−7 = 5×10−4h/(N +
1). The probed and ﬁnal solution of the numerical simulation is shown in ﬁg. 20. Even if barely perceptible,
the solution tends to grow while advected along x. The same detailed view of ﬁg. 19 is reproduced in ﬁg. 21.
In this zoomed visualisation, it is possible to observe more clearly the increase in amplitude of the sinusoidal
signal while propagating into the domain, whereas no growth is observed monitoring the probed solution.
The above results conﬁrm that the explicit Euler scheme is marginally stable for pure advection, a well-known
deﬁciency of this method [50]. Still, for under-resolved problems (i.e. large frequencies), the fully-discrete scheme
revealed to be stable, probably due to the increased upwind dissipation acting against the anti-dissipation of
the explicit Euler method. In either case, once the solution establishes itself in space, it does not grow over time
— in line with what is expected within the spatial analysis framework: either stability or convective instability.
4.2. Accurately resolved ﬂows
In the theoretical analysis, presented in the ﬁrst part of the paper, the discussion was organized making
distinction between high and low frequencies, considering more or less extended upper bounds for the fre-
quency ω. In the low frequency regions, the reduced order of accuracy for time steps approaching the CFL
limit was observed. The convergence results already reported in the temporal eigenanalysis by Vermeire et
al. [43] were correctly reproduced within the present fully-discrete spatial eigenanalysis framework (see ﬁg. 8).
Such feature highlights the similarity between temporal and spatial eigenanalysis for well-resolved wavenum-
bers/frequencies respectively. For high frequencies, instead, the fully-discrete spatial eigenanalysis has shown
signiﬁcant variations from the semi-discrete analysis. In the present subsection we will perform a series of
numerical experiments on accurately resolved nonlinear inviscid ﬂows in order to validate the theoretical anal-
ysis for well-resolved frequencies. A second subsection will instead be dedicated to under-resolved ﬂows which
are commonly associated to high-frequencies which are only partially resolved by the numerical scheme. In
19

Figure 17:
Numerical solution of ω0 = 0.1 using explicit Euler time integration scheme.
Top, ∆t = 9.825 × 10−5; Center
∆t = 9.925 × 10−5; Bottom ∆t = 1.0925 × 10−4.
Figure 18: Numerical solution of ω1 = 1.3 using explicit Euler time integration scheme with ∆t = 1.0×10−6. Top, probed solution
at x = 0.5; Bottom, numerical solution at the end of the simulation. The red horizontal line indicates the iso-line u = 1.
particular, as a representative example of the spatial eigenanalysis, a variation of the classic isentropic vortex
simulation [52] have been considered. Such formulation is based on an inﬂow-type condition and is charac-
terised by spatial grid inhomogeneity due to a sudden change of mesh resolution in the middle of the domain.
Clearly, such conﬁguration is particularly representative of spatial eigenanalysis, where an oscillatory ﬂow ﬁeld
is imposed at the inlet boundary and let evolve along the streamwise direction. Finally, in terms of turbulent
ﬂows, the study of highly accurate ﬁelds, where all the scales and frequencies are suﬃciently well-resolved by
the numerical scheme, is directly linked to the Direct Numerical Simulation (DNS) approach.
4.2.1. Inlet-outlet advection of isentropic Euler vortex
A similar numerical set-up with respect to the classical isentropic vortex test case has been considered in
order to avoid the use periodic boundary conditions, which are classically associated to temporal eigenanalysis.
A formulation considering inlet/outlet boundaries is, instead, a much more representative example of spatial
20

Figure 19: Closer look of the solution of ﬁg. 18 around u = 1 (red line).
Figure 20: Numerical solution of ω1 = 1.2 using explicit Euler time integration scheme with ∆t = 1.0×10−7. Top, probed solution
at x = 0.5; Bottom, numerical solution at the end of the simulation. The red horizontal line indicates the iso-line u = 1.
eigenanalysis, where a temporal frequency is imposed to the system at the inlet and the evolution of the
numerical solution is studied while propagating through the space.
At the initial time, two vortices are centered at x = 1/4L and x = 3/4L, where L = 40 denotes the full
horizontal length of the domain. Each vortex is characterised by the smooth solution:
ρ =

1 −β2(γ −1)
16γπ2
e2(1−r2)

1
γ−1
,
u = u0 −β(y −yc)
2π
e1−r2,
v = v0 + β(x −xc)
2π
e1−r2,
p = ργ,
(26)
where r =
p
(x −xc)2 + (y −yc)2, with xc and yc indicating the coordinates of the vortex's center, and γ = 1.4
indicates the speciﬁc heat ratio. The parameter β deﬁnes the strength of the vortex and, for this particular
study, a value equal to 5 has been chosen, providing a relatively strong vortex. Subsequently, the solution is
advected by the constant velocity ﬁeld (u0, v0) = (5, 0) while a constant stream of new isentropic vortices is
imposed on the left boundary. After a full period has passed, two new vortices have entered the domain from
the inlet boundary, whereas the two initial ones have left the domain through the outlet boundary.
The smooth analytical solution of the isentropic vortex test case provides an ideal set-up to evaluate the
21

Figure 21: Closer look of the solution of ﬁg. 20 around u = 1 (red line).
Figure 22: Example of deformed computational grid used in the isentropic vortex simulation.
convergence of numerical schemes for the discretisation of Euler equations. The numerical solution of Euler
equations has been considered on a series of increasingly reﬁned grids. Namely, the number of elements of the
diﬀerent meshes reads Nel = Nx ×Ny = 2Ny ×Ny with Ny = 10, 20, 40, 80, 160. In order to highlight numerical
errors, both regular and deformed grids have been considered. An example of deformed mesh is shown in
ﬁg. 22. Furthermore, in order to study the evolution of the initial solution while propagating in space, a sudden
change on streamwise grid resolution has been placed in the middle of the domain (see ﬁg. 22). This way, the
three-fold inﬂuence of inlet, outlet and mesh coarsening can be probed in a single test. Finally, in order to keep
small the numerical errors associated to the spatial discretisation, relatively high orders of approximation have
been considered. In particular 6th and 8th order accurate Spectral Diﬀerence simulations have been performed,
coupled with a 3rd order Runge-Kutta scheme as time integration scheme. In order to evaluate the inﬂuence of
temporal numerical errors, the time step has been chosen such that τ = 0.1, 0.5, 0.9.
The goal of the present test case consists in showing the essential equivalence between spatial and temporal
approaches in the well-resolved regions (the former for well-resolved wavenumbers, the latter for well-resolved
frequencies). When we prescribe the stream of vortices through the inlet condition, given the large number
of degrees of freedom (DOF) employed in the tests (high polynomial order), we are in fact working in the
low-frequency, well-resolved region of spatial analysis. The L2 error of the density ﬁeld is easily evaluated and
a convergence study can be performed similarly to the classical test case (whose results are omitted for the sake
22

(a) N=5
(b) N=7
Figure 23: Density's convergence when using RK33. Black line, τ = 0.1; purple line τ = 0.5; orange line τ = 0.9. Solid line,
structured grid; dashed line, deformed grid.
of brevity).
The convergence plots for the 6th and 8th order simulations in conjunction with RK33 are shown in ﬁg. 23.
These plots very closely resemble those found for the classical (periodic) case. We note that time steps close
to the CFL limit slow down the error convergence. In particular, the expected convergence rate arising from
the spatial discretisation is eventually reduced to the order of the time integration scheme. When meshes of
stronger deformation are considered, the same behaviour is observed, but at smaller grid sizes. This is believed
to happen because of the augmented spatial numerical errors, which can hide the eﬀect of large time steps.
In order to illustrate the inﬂuence of the time step on the evolution of the vortex, the absolute value of
the thermodynamic entropy s = log(ρ−γp) has been employed as an indicator of numerical errors. Of course,
since an inviscid, shock-free, Euler ﬂow is being considered, the entropy should be theoretically conserved
everywhere in the domain. Any deviation from a constant entropy state is then entirely associated to numerical
artifacts. The entropy ﬁelds at the ﬁnal time using τ = 0.9 and τ = 0.99 are shown in ﬁg. 24, for the 6th order
discretisation coupled with RK33. It is interesting to notice that in most of the domain the entropy ﬁelds of the
two simulations are quite similar. The only relevant diﬀerences are represented by the highly irregular spurious
oscillations close to the line y = 0. These are stronger in the second part of the domain, as they are connected
with spurious transmitted waves (only barely dissipated as τ →1). Smaller spurious waves are reﬂected into
the ﬁrst part of the domain too, but are more quickly dissipated as they propagate backwards. In agreement
with the work by Vermeire et al. [43], a non-negligible inﬂuence of the time step choice is observed only very
close to the CFL limit.
4.3. Under-resolved ﬂows
As mentioned in the previous section, a ﬁrst comparative study between spatial and temporal eigenanalysis
can be performed considering well-resolved ﬂow ﬁelds. In such conditions, both theories should return the
expected decrease of spatial accuracy for large time steps close to the CFL limit. In the previous section such
behaviour has been numerically conﬁrmed. In this second test, instead, high frequencies and wavenumbers (i.e.
23

Figure 24: Absolute value of the thermodynamic entropy s = ln(ρ−γp) throughout the domain for the 6th order simulation coupled
with RK33 using τ = 0.9 (top) and τ = 0.99 (bottom). Vertical white line denotes the location of the mesh coarsening.
under-resolved ﬂow ﬁelds) will be considered. In contrast to the previous section, where well-resolved ﬁelds
have been naturally associated to DNS, now the behaviour of the numerical scheme represents Large Eddy
Simulations (LES, and in particular Implicit LES), where only the large-scale dynamics is adequately resolved
by the number of DOF employed. According to the theoretical analysis, for cases employing standard upwind
ﬂuxes, large time step values should considerably decrease the overall level of numerical dissipation, aﬀecting
the simulation both in terms of stability and accuracy. To perform these tests while focusing on spatial analysis
errors, a two-dimensional duct ﬂow has been considered.
4.3.1. Two-dimensional grid turbulence
As a typical sample of non-periodic test case, a simple duct ﬂow with oscillating inlet velocity has been
considered. The domain consists in a 20π × 2π rectangle. Although two-dimensional and inviscid, the present
test case is suﬃciently insightful to quantify the relevant role of the numerical scheme for under-resolved ﬂows,
as already shown in many diﬀerent works [32, 33, 34, 35].
The inlet boundary condition reads
ρ = ρ∞,
u = u∞

1 + A sin(Ky) sin(Ωt)
0

,
p = p∞,
24

Figure 25: Example of computational grid used in the duct ﬂow simulation.
Figure 26: Example of duct ﬂow ﬁeld (velocity magnitude). The white vertical line denotes the change of mesh size interface.
where ρ∞= 1, u∞= 1 and p∞= (ρ∞u2
∞)/(γMa2) in order to get a desired value of inﬂow Mach number.
The parameters deﬁning the inﬂow perturbations have been set as A = 1/2, K = 5, Ω= 1. The prescribed
Mach number is set equal to 0.03. For this particular choice, the ﬂow is then essentially incompressible. Non-
reﬂective Roe ﬂux-based boundary conditions are employed at the outlet, whereas top and bottom boundaries
are modeled as free-slip walls. The results have been obtained with a 6th-order SD scheme coupled with RK33.
In order to trigger spurious numerical oscillations, a sudden change in streamwise mesh spacing is imposed
at x = 12π, as shown in ﬁg. 25. The number of elements along the cross-ﬂow direction is N y
el = 12. Along the
streamwise direction, this number is N x1
el = 72 in the ﬁrst block and N x2
el = 12 in the second block.
A typical ﬂow ﬁeld is illustrated in ﬁg. 26, where the two-dimensional nature of the ﬂow leads to a well-known
reverse cascade process, with small vortices eventually merging into larger ones. Regardless, the mechanism by
which kinetic energy is exchanged across scales is signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by the underlying numerical errors,
whereby the present under-resolved test case is insightful with regards to implicit LES.
Although Roe-type solvers have been found to successfully suppress spurious oscillations coming from the
outﬂow boundary and from the line of mesh size change [32, 33, 35], these results typically rely on simulations
that are well-resolved in time. The main goal of the present test is to check whether such behaviour is aﬀected
by time step size (as predicted by theory) or not. The test case has been considered for τ = 0.5, 0.9 and 0.99.
Similar to the previous test case (isentropic vortex), the time step inﬂuence is very small from a macroscopic
point of view. All cases computed with τ < 0.95 (approximately) behaved quite similarly. Only in very close
proximity of the CFL limit, spurious oscillations arose from the numerical solution. As in the previous case,
such behaviour is qualitatively represented in ﬁg. 27 using the thermodynamic entropy ﬁeld. Again, spurious
transmitted waves are seen when τ is suﬃciently close to unity. In addition, the line of mesh size change seems
to trigger more spurious reﬂected waves than the outﬂow boundary (at least for this test problem).
Only for values of τ close to unity, spurious entropy oscillations take place. Due to the structured nature
of the mesh, spurious oscillations arise diﬀusively in the whole domain. In fact, a large number of cells reaches
critical values of ∆t simultaneously, producing spurious entropy oscillations. The same conclusions obtained
from isentropic vortex case seem to apply here: the spatial under-resolution hides/overshadows the inﬂuence
of the prescribed time step. The inﬂuence of the time integration scheme is then noticeable only very close to
25

Figure 27: Entropy ﬁeld. The white vertical line denotes the change of mesh size interface.
instability, whereas almost any time step fulﬁlling the CFL condition does not impact the overall accuracy of
the numerical solution (already limited by the spatial discretisation).
5. Conclusions
A fully-discrete generalisation of the spatial eigenanalysis has been presented and applied to the Spectral
Diﬀerence (SD) and Discontinuous Galerkin (DG) schemes. A detailed discussion has been presented on spatial
dissipative curves and their dependence on the time step size for 1st- to 4th-order explicit Runge-Kutta time
integration schemes. The behaviour for both well-resolved and under-resolved frequencies has been considered.
In the fully-discrete spatial eigenanalysis, it has been shown that in the low frequency range, in similarity with
the fully-discrete temporal eigenanalysis, the theoretical spatial convergence rate degrades to the local order of
accuracy of the time integration scheme. In the high wavenumbers/frequencies regions, instead, temporal and
spatial eigenanalyses have signiﬁcantly diﬀerent behaviours. Both are inﬂuenced by the time step size and in
both cases numerical dissipation generally decreases for larger time steps employing upwind ﬂuxes. In the case
of almost centered ﬂuxes, the dissipative bubbles, typical of spatial eigenanalysis of high-order methods, tend
to be smoother for increasing time step size. Regions that experience negligible numerical dissipation in the
semi-discrete analysis are characterised by stronger diﬀusion in the fully-discrete generalisation.
The SD discretisation of the one-dimensional linear advection equation has been used to validate the theo-
retical ﬁndings. Numerical experiments have shown good agreement with the theory where the time step size
has shown to enhance numerical dissipation for certain frequencies and suppressed it for others. Nonlinear
simulations using Euler equations have been performed to quantify the interplay between spatial and temporal
errors for more complex dynamics. In agreement with the previous discussion, the Euler simulations have been
grouped in well-resolved and under-resolved ﬂows. An inlet-outlet formulation of the classical isentropic vortex
test case have been used to validate fully-discrete temporal and spatial eigenanalyses for well-resolved ﬂows. As
predicted by the theory, the expected convergence rate, for suﬃciently large time steps, is signiﬁcantly polluted
by temporal errors.
In the case of under-resolved ﬂows, instead, the inﬂuence of the time step size has shown to be negligi-
ble. Spurious oscillations become large enough to visibly pollute the solution only for very large time steps
approaching the CFL limit. In under-resolved ﬂows, in fact, the spatial errors dominate their temporal coun-
terparts, overshadowing the inﬂuence of the time integration scheme. In conclusion, the theoretical framework
26

introduced in the ﬁrst part of the paper is not always representative of more complex nonlinear dynamics. For
well-resolved ﬂows, the slower convergence has been observed in both the theoretical framework and in the Euler
ﬂow simulations. Consequently, the choice of the time step size plays a more relevant role in highly accurate
simulations such as DNS of turbulent ﬂows. Instead, in the presence of signiﬁcant spatial under-resolution (like
in LES), temporal errors are more likely overshadowed by spatial errors.
Acknowledgements
The use of the SD solver originally developed by Antony Jameson's group at Stanford University is gratefully
acknowledged. This work was granted access to the high-performance computing resources of CRIANN. The
PhD scholarship of the ﬁrst author is founded by the University of Rouen Normandie. RCM acknowledges
support from São Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP) via grant 2020/10910-8. GL acknowledges support
from the Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR) under grant number ANR-18-CE05-0030. GM acknowledges
support from National University of Singapore start-up grant WBS R-265-000-A36-133. The authors also thank
David Kopriva, Tristan Montoya and David Zingg for fruitful discussions.
Appendix
A series of plots for the dissipation of the FR-DG scheme are given in Fig. 28, whereas plots for the FR-SD
scheme are given in Fig. 29. The SD curves look similar to those of DG, but are moderately shifted up (stronger
dissipation, note the vertical axis) and to the left (toward lower frequencies).
In Fig. 30, the evolution of the multiple modes of the (nearly) centred FR-SD with RK33 and RK45 are
shown for N = 2. Similar plots for N = 4 are shown in Fig. 31.
27

Figure 28: Dissipation of the FR-DG scheme for RK33 (left) and RK45 (right) at polynomial orders N = 1, 2, 3, 6 (top to bottom).
28

Figure 29: Dissipation of the FR-SD scheme for RK33 (left) and RK45 (right) at polynomial orders N = 1, 2, 3, 6 (top to bottom).
29

Figure 30: Numerical dissipation for a 3rd order FR-SD discretisation using centred numerical ﬂuxes coupled with RK33 (left)
and RK45 (right) time integration schemes. The thinner curves closer to the dashed line represent the semi-discrete result (no
temporal error).
30

Figure 31: Numerical dissipation for a 5th order FR-SD discretisation using centred numerical ﬂuxes coupled with RK33 (left)
and RK45 (right) time integration schemes. The thinner curves closer to the dashed line represent the semi-discrete result (no
temporal error).
31

References
[1] C. Liang, S. Premasuthan, A. Jameson, High-order accurate simulation of low-mach laminar ﬂow past two
side-by-side cylinders using spectral diﬀerence method, Computers & structures 87 (11-12) (2009) 812-827.
[2] C. Liang, A. Jameson, Z. J. Wang, Spectral diﬀerence method for compressible ﬂow on unstructured grids
with mixed elements, Journal of Computational Physics 228 (8) (2009) 2847-2858.
[3] A. Jameson, A proof of the stability of the spectral diﬀerence method for all orders of accuracy, J. Sci. Com-
put. 45 (1) (2010) 348-358.
[4] J. Slotnick, A. Khodadoust, J. Alonso, D. Darmofal, W. Gropp, E. Lurie, D. Mavriplis, CFD vision 2030
study: A path to revolutionary computational aerosciences, Tech. rep., NASA Langley Research Center,
Hampton, Virginia 23681-2199, NASA Contractor Report 218178 (Mar. 2014).
[5] P. E. Vincent, A. Jameson, Facilitating the adoption of unstructured high-order methods amongst a wider
community of ﬂuid dynamicists, Mathematical Modelling of Natural Phenomena 6 (3) (2011) 97-140.
[6] J. S. Hesthaven, T. Warburton, Nodal discontinuous Galerkin methods: algorithms, analysis, and applica-
tions, Springer Science & Business Media, 2007.
[7] B. Cockburn, C. Shu, The local discontinuous Galerkin ﬁnite element method for convection-diﬀusion
systems, SIAM J. Numer. Anal. 35 (1998) 2440-2463.
[8] B. Cockburn, C. Shu, The Runge-Kutta discontinuous Galerkin ﬁnite element method for conservation
laws V: Multidimensional systems, J. Comput. Phys. 141 (1998) 199-224.
[9] D. A. Kopriva, J. H. Kolias, A conservative staggered-grid chebyshev multidomain method for compressible
ﬂows, Journal of computational physics 125 (1) (1996) 244-261.
[10] Y. Liu, M. Vinokur, Z. Wang, Spectral diﬀerence method for unstructured grids I: basic formulation,
J. Comput. Phys. 216 (2) (2006) 780-801.
[11] Z. Wang, Y. Liu, G. May, A. Jameson, Spectral diﬀerence method for unstructured grids II: Extension to
the Euler equations, J. Sci. Comput. 32 (1) (2007) 45-71.
[12] H. T. Huynh, A ﬂux reconstruction approach to high-order schemes including discontinuous Galerkin
methods, in: 18th AIAA Computational Fluid Dynamics Conference, 2007, p. 4079.
[13] P. E. Vincent, P. Castonguay, A. Jameson, A new class of high-order energy stable ﬂux reconstruction
schemes, Journal of Scientiﬁc Computing 47 (1) (2011) 50-72.
[14] J.-B. Chapelier, M. De La Llave Plata, F. Renac, E. Lamballais, Evaluation of a high-order discontinuous
galerkin method for the dns of turbulent ﬂows, Computers & Fluids 95 (2014) 210-226.
[15] M. de la Llave Plata, V. Couaillier, M.-C. Le Pape, On the use of a high-order discontinuous galerkin
method for dns and les of wall-bounded turbulence, Computers & Fluids 176 (2018) 320-337.
32

[16] F. Bassi, L. Botti, A. Colombo, A. Crivellini, A. Ghidoni, F. Massa, On the development of an implicit
high-order discontinuous galerkin method for dns and implicit les of turbulent ﬂows, European Journal of
Mechanics-B/Fluids 55 (2016) 367-379.
[17] B. Krank, M. Kronbichler, W. A. Wall, Direct numerical simulation of ﬂow over periodic hills up to
ReH = 10, 595, Flow, turbulence and combustion 101 (2) (2018) 521-551.
[18] G. Lodato, N. Tonicello, B. Pinto, Large-eddy simulation of bypass transition on a zero-pressure-gradient
ﬂat plate using the spectral-element dynamic model, Flow, Turbulence and Combustion (2021) 1-30.
[19] N. Tonicello, G. Lodato, L. Vervisch, Analysis of high-order explicit les dynamic modeling applied to airfoil
ﬂows, Flow, Turbulence and Combustion (2021) 1-28.
[20] P. Fernandez, N.-C. Nguyen, J. Peraire, On the ability of discontinuous Galerkin methods to simulate
under-resolved turbulent ﬂows, arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.09435.
[21] R. C. Moura, G. Mengaldo, J. Peiró, S. J. Sherwin, On the eddy-resolving capability of high-order discon-
tinuous Galerkin approaches to implicit LES/under-resolved DNS of Euler turbulence, Journal of Compu-
tational Physics 330 (2017) 615-623.
[22] M. de la Llave Plata, E. Lamballais, F. Naddei, On the performance of a high-order multiscale dg approach
to les at increasing reynolds number, Computers & Fluids 194 (2019) 104306.
[23] G. Mengaldo, D. Moxey, M. Turner, R. C. Moura, A. Jassim, M. Taylor, J. Peiro, S. Sherwin, Industry-
relevant implicit large-eddy simulation of a high-performance road car via spectral/hp element methods,
SIAM Review 63 (4) (2021) 723-755.
[24] C. Cox, W. Trojak, T. Dzanic, F. Witherden, A. Jameson, Accuracy, stability, and performance comparison
between the spectral diﬀerence and ﬂux reconstruction schemes, Computers & Fluids 221 (2021) 104922.
[25] S. K. Lele, Compact ﬁnite diﬀerence schemes with spectral-like resolution, Journal of computational physics
103 (1) (1992) 16-42.
[26] C. Bogey, C. Bailly, A family of low dispersive and low dissipative explicit schemes for ﬂow and noise
computations, Journal of Computational physics 194 (1) (2004) 194-214.
[27] K. Van den Abeele, C. Lacor, Z. J. Wang, On the stability and accuracy of the spectral diﬀerence method,
Journal of Scientiﬁc Computing 37 (2) (2008) 162-188.
[28] P. E. Vincent, P. Castonguay, A. Jameson, Insights from von neumann analysis of high-order ﬂux recon-
struction schemes, Journal of Computational Physics 230 (22) (2011) 8134-8154.
[29] R. C. Moura, S. J. Sherwin, J. Peiró, Linear dispersion-diﬀusion analysis and its application to under-
resolved turbulence simulations using discontinuous Galerkin spectral/hp methods, Journal of Computa-
tional Physics 298 (2015) 695-710.
33

[30] J. Vanharen, G. Puigt, X. Vasseur, J.-F. Boussuge, P. Sagaut, Revisiting the spectral analysis for high-order
spectral discontinuous methods, Journal of Computational Physics 337 (2017) 379-402.
[31] F. Q. Hu, H. L. Atkins, Eigensolution analysis of the discontinuous Galerkin method with nonuniform
grids: I. one space dimension, Journal of Computational Physics 182 (2) (2002) 516-545.
[32] G. Mengaldo, R. Moura, B. Giralda, J. Peiró, S. Sherwin, Spatial eigensolution analysis of discontinuous
Galerkin schemes with practical insights for under-resolved computations and implicit LES, Computers &
Fluids 169 (2018) 349-364.
[33] G. Mengaldo, D. De Grazia, R. C. Moura, S. J. Sherwin, Spatial eigensolution analysis of energy-stable
ﬂux reconstruction schemes and inﬂuence of the numerical ﬂux on accuracy and robustness, Journal of
Computational Physics 358 (2018) 1-20.
[34] R. C. Moura, M. Aman, J. Peiró, S. J. Sherwin, Spatial eigenanalysis of spectral/hp continuous Galerkin
schemes and their stabilisation via DG-mimicking spectral vanishing viscosity for high Reynolds number
ﬂows, Journal of Computational Physics 406 (2020) 109112.
[35] N. Tonicello, G. Lodato, L. Vervisch, A comparative study from spectral analyses of high-order methods
with non-constant advection velocities, Journal of Scientiﬁc Computing 87 (3) (2021) 1-38.
[36] W. Trojak, R. Watson, A. Scillitoe, P. G. Tucker, Eﬀect of mesh quality on ﬂux reconstruction in multi-
dimensions, Journal of Scientiﬁc Computing 82 (3) (2020) 1-36.
[37] G. Sáez-Mischlich, J. Sierra-Ausín, J. Gressier, The spectral diﬀerence raviart-thomas method for two and
three-dimensional elements and its connection with the ﬂux reconstruction formulation, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2105.08632.
[38] J. Manzanero, G. Rubio, E. Ferrer, E. Valero, Dispersion-dissipation analysis for advection problems with
nonconstant coeﬃcients: Applications to discontinuous Galerkin formulations, SIAM Journal on Scientiﬁc
Computing 40 (2) (2018) A747-A768.
[39] J. Manzanero, G. Rubio, E. Ferrer, E. Valero, D. A. Kopriva, Insights on aliasing driven instabilities for
advection equations with application to gauss-lobatto discontinuous Galerkin methods (2017).
[40] P. Fernandez, R. C. Moura, G. Mengaldo, J. Peraire, Non-modal analysis of spectral element methods:
Towards accurate and robust large-eddy simulations, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engi-
neering 346 (2019) 43-62. doi:10.1016/j.cma.2018.11.027.
[41] M. Alhawwary, Z. Wang, A combined-mode Fourier analysis of DG methods for linear parabolic problems,
SIAM Journal on Scientiﬁc Computing 42 (6) (2020) A3825-A3858.
[42] H. Yang, F. Li, J. Qiu, Dispersion and dissipation errors of two fully discrete discontinuous galerkin
methods, Journal of Scientiﬁc Computing 55 (3) (2013) 552-574.
[43] B. Vermeire, P. Vincent, On the behaviour of fully-discrete ﬂux reconstruction schemes, Computer Methods
in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 315 (2017) 1053-1079.
34

[44] M. Alhawwary, Z. J. Wang, Fourier analysis and evaluation of dg, fd and compact diﬀerence methods for
conservation laws, Journal of Computational Physics 373 (2018) 835-862.
[45] D. De Grazia, G. Mengaldo, D. Moxey, P. Vincent, S. Sherwin, Connections between the discontinuous
galerkin method and high-order ﬂux reconstruction schemes, International journal for numerical methods
in ﬂuids 75 (12) (2014) 860-877.
[46] G. Mengaldo, Discontinuous spectral/hp element methods: development, analysis and applications to
compressible ﬂows, Ph.D. thesis, Imperial College London (2015).
[47] G. Mengaldo, D. De Grazia, P. E. Vincent, S. J. Sherwin, On the connections between discontinuous
galerkin and ﬂux reconstruction schemes: extension to curvilinear meshes, Journal of Scientiﬁc Computing
67 (3) (2016) 1272-1292.
[48] K. Asthana, A. Jameson, High-order ﬂux reconstruction schemes with minimal dispersion and dissipation,
Journal of Scientiﬁc Computing 62 (3) (2015) 913-944.
[49] M. H. Carpenter, C. A. Kennedy, Fourth-order 2N-storage Runge-Kutta schemes, Tech. rep., NASA Lan-
gley Research Center (1994).
[50] H. Lomax, T. H. Pulliam, D. W. Zingg, Fundamentals of Computational Fluid Dynamics, Springer Science
& Business Media, 2013.
[51] R. C. Moura, S. J. Sherwin, J. Peiró, Eigensolution analysis of spectral/hp continuous Galerkin approxima-
tions to advection-diﬀusion problems: Insights into spectral vanishing viscosity, Journal of Computational
Physics 307 (2016) 401-422.
[52] C.-W. Shu, Essentially non-oscillatory and weighted essentially non-oscillatory schemes for hyperbolic
conservation laws, in: Advanced numerical approximation of nonlinear hyperbolic equations, Springer,
1998, pp. 325-432.
35

